good afternoon and welcome to Downing
Street for the daily coronavirus
briefing I'm joined by the deputy chief
medical officer Jenny Harris and by NHS
England's medical director for primary
care dr. Nikki Kanani first I want to
take this chance to update you on the
latest coronavirus data two million
three hundred and fifty 3078 tests for
corona virus have now been carried out
in the UK including 133 thousand seven
hundred and eighty four tests yesterday
two hundred and thirty six thousand
seven hundred and eleven people have
tested positive for the virus an
increase of three thousand five hundred
and sixty since yesterday ten thousand
and twenty four people are currently in
hospital with corona virus this is a
thirteen percent fall from the same time
last week and very sadly of those who
tested positive across all settings
thirty three thousand nine hundred and
ninety eight people have now died that's
an increase of 384 since yesterday and
we mourn each one the number of deaths
is falling each day in all settings
thankfully and we are past the peak of
this virus and I just want to take a
moment to remind everyone about our
plans for this second phase if we have
slide one please we've set up the nuke
ovid alert level system that's their
five levels of threat based on the
r-value and the number of new cases the
alert level in turn our guides the
social distancing rules which are vital
in our efforts to control the virus a
higher alert level means stricter rules
throughout the lockdown we've been at
level four which means that kovat 19 is
in general circulation and transmission
is high or rising exponentially but
thanks to your shared sacrifice we
brought our down help
and carefully and responsibly we're now
in a position to start moving to level 3
if we go to the next slide please we've
set out the first of the three steps
that will take carefully to modify the
social distancing rules and start to
restore freedom to this country all the
while avoiding a disastrous second peak
that could overwhelm the NHS at each
step will closely monitor the impact on
our on the number of new infections and
on of course all available data and will
only move to the next step when we judge
it's safe to do so in the first step as
of this week if you work but can't work
from home you should speak to your
employer about going back in people can
now spend time outdoors and exercise as
often as you like and you can meet one
other person from outside your household
in an outdoor public place but please
keep two metres apart this weekend with
the good weather and the new rules I
hope people can enjoy being outside but
please stick with the rules keep an eye
on your family and don't take risks next
slide please
we've also updated what we're asking
people to do which is to stay alert
control the virus and save lives for the
vast majority of people staying alert
still means staying at home as much as
is possible working from home when you
can limit in contact with people keeping
your distance if you go out 2 metres
wherever possible washing your hands
regularly this is still the most the
single most effective thing that you can
do to keep yourself safe and of course
self isolating if you or anyone in your
household has coronavirus symptoms by
staying alert and following the rules
you can play a part in the national
effort getting are down and keeping are
down controlling the virus so that we
can save lives
rebuild livelihoods and start to recover
our freedom as a nation
from the start of this crisis across the
world because this disease has a bigger
impact on the elderly there's been a
huge need to protect people in care
homes we've worked to do this in this
country right from the start of the
crisis
this morning's information from the ONS
once again reminds us that care homes do
so much to look after our most
vulnerable people in their frailty
towards the end of their life many of
you watching this will have a loved one
in a care home as I do and I know how
worrying it's been so I can I want to
tell you what we've been doing to
protect people in care homes throughout
the crisis if we start with the data in
April 30 1203 people died in care homes
of whom eleven thousand five hundred and
sixty died with coronavirus I'm grateful
to the ONS for having responded to the
requests to put extra resources into
understanding and measuring all this
right from the start it's been clear
that this horrible virus affects older
people most so right from the start
we've tried to throw a protective ring
around our care homes we set out our
first advice in February and as the
virus grew we strengthened it throughout
we've made sure that care homes have the
resources they need to control the
spread of infection Social Care is a
devolved matter of course and this week
we've made a further six hundred million
pounds available to care homes in
England this comes on top of the 3.2
billion we made available in March in
April and the 712 million pounds were
made available to the devolved
authorities that's 369 million extra for
Scotland two hundred and twenty three
million extra for Wales and 124 million
for Northern Ireland
we've put extra infection control
procedures in place and prioritized
testing in care homes we test any
resident returning to a care home from
and all residents with symptoms and all
social care colleagues and members of
their households if they have symptoms
together these measures have saved lives
and protected 64 percent of care homes
almost two-thirds from having any
coronavirus cases at all and where there
are cases we've taken extra measures to
protect residents and staff with local
public health officials playing such a
critical role now we have capacity for
well over a hundred thousand tests a day
we're extending testing coverage still
further all care home residents and
staff in England
both those with symptoms and those
without are now being tested and in fact
will test every resident and every
member of staff in our elderly care
homes in England between now and early
June to get those tests to where they
need to be we've set up an easy-to-use
digital service on Google you K allowing
care home managers to apply online for
the testing kits next we've strengthened
the NHS support available to colleagues
in social care and this is what Nikki is
here to talk about today throughout the
NHS has been supporting care homes with
infection control training and advise
and support on for instance PPE usage
we're putting in place a named clinical
lead for every care home in England
these leads are already connected and
will check in regularly to assess
residence and support care home staff
with clinical advice this is the most
intense support and scrutiny that Care
Homes have ever received in some cases
for residents who need to see a GP a
video consultation may be safer and just
as effective so the NHS is also
supporting care homes to introduce the
right technology this same technology
can and is being a being used to be able
to help residents stay connected to
their loved ones something I know is
important both for their well-being and
for ours third we're making sure local
authorities play their part we're now
requiring councils to conduct daily
reviews of the situation on the ground
in local care homes these reviews ensure
that every care home gets the support
they need every single day and we're
requiring care homes to ensure the flow
of timely and accurate care home data so
local and national government can
support and where necessary challenge
and act if that's what's needed as a
result of all this and the work of so
many people across the social care
system and across the NHS and across
local government two-thirds of England's
care homes have had no outbreak at all
the number of care homes reporting their
first case each day has fallen from a
peak of 219 to 59 I'm glad to report
that since the peak the number of kovat
19 deaths of people in care homes has
halved but whilst this is progress there
is so much more to do and this crisis
has also demonstrated the imperative for
reform it's shown the importance of long
standing calls for closer working
between health and social care it's
acted as a catalyst for integration and
shown the benefits of it on the ground
information support and mutual
understanding between health and social
care are flowing better than ever before
helping to break down some historic
barriers despite the system not because
of it and my view is that health and
social care have a common mission to
care for people but too often in the
past bureaucracy has held them apart
from the start we've worked incredibly
hard to throw that protective ring
around our care homes yes it has been
difficult these viruses reserve their
full cruelty for those who are
physically weakest the elderly the frail
and the already sick all those who most
rely on human contact
people who live in care homes are
amongst our most vulnerable citizens
we'll do everything humanly possible to
protect them for as long as they are
threatened by this virus and thanks to
the collective efforts of everyone
watching we have passed through the peak
but the
is still a long road ahead so stay alert
control the virus and save lives if
Jenny can now take us through the rest
of the daily data
next slide please thank you and so today
we're hearing a lot about the are number
so it's important that the public can
see that so for the first time this
afternoon we're publishing the are
number we want to keep this below 1 and
as you can see our is the average number
of additional people infected so while
it's one a pandemic and epidemic in this
country will stay flat if it goes above
that number we will start to see an
increasing number of cases and we may
experience the second peak so it's
really important that we keep monitoring
it having said that you can see that
there's quite a range they're not 0.7 to
1 in the estimate of our and this is for
a number of reasons partly because a
number of different models are used to
model this data and it's important that
they challenge each other and that we
get the consistency of that partly the
data comes from historic data we
obviously can't predict precisely so
we're estimating it on different sources
of information so things like hospital
admissions that have happened
historically and then I think thirdly
importantly we know that we have
slightly different our values relating
to some areas of risk so obviously in
recent weeks care homes have been a
heightened interest hospitals also and
we keep an eye on those so this is very
much a national average but it's quite
likely in the community across the
country that where people have been
working really hard on the social
distancing measures that our value will
be lower this is an average across the
country and on the left-hand side you
can see it's important that we take the
r-value in the context of the case
numbers that we're seeing across the
country and from the ONS survey which is
a community survey conducted in people's
homes on the longitudinal basis so
sequentially the average proportion of
the community in England that
Kove it was not 0.27% upper limit of
that about naught point four so a
maximum of about one in four hundred
people and then right across the country
therefore in England a broad estimate of
around a hundred and forty eight
thousand of people with kovat at any
time so that's coming down next time
please so the data on the left is from
Google mobility data obviously there's a
little bit we can't control exactly
who's uploading that but it gives us a
pretty good indication of people's
movements and you can see that early in
March people were moving as normal and
the we've seen a significant drop-off as
social distancing measures have come in
that's continued to be maintained so
people are only going out in the main
four permitted activities so some people
going to work as permitted but many
staying at home going out for grocery
and pharmacy which are essential visits
and then a rise in the use of parks
coming forward now and we anticipate
that within social distancing measures
that will increase and on the right hand
side you can see the ons opinions and
lifestyle survey and that shows that 44%
of employed adults are actually working
from home compared to 12% last year this
is a change in habit and we're expecting
that people will maintain that and
advising that they should and it's
probably going to be a successful way
forward for us to control many of the
social distancing measures over the next
few months
eighty percent of adults only left home
for those permitted reasons that we can
see on the left and ninety-one percent
of adults have avoided contact with
vulnerable people so everybody is trying
to keep each other under vulnerable
people safe next slide please
here we can see the slide which
represents current situation with
testing so a hundred and thirty three
thousand seven hundred and eighty four
tests were completed up to nine o'clock
on 15th of May so this includes lab
tests those were posted out and the
satellite testing and you can see the
rise there
going forward on the top chart at the
right so we're heading towards two and a
half million tests in total now and
we've had three thousand five hundred
and sixty cases confirmed over the last
24 hours
which brings the UK total to two hundred
and thirty six thirty six thousand seven
hundred and eleven and the graph on the
bottom left
despite that increasing testing and
therefore the likelihood of finding new
cases is continuing to come down next
slide please
this shows our data from hospitals so
the estimated emissions with Co vyd in
hospital is now down to nine hundred and
ten on the 13th May so that was that's
down from over a thousand the week
before and the graph obviously on the
right is showing that clearly the Dan
would trend on the graph is it's down
but it's slow and careful and therefore
we need to maintain our social
distancing measures but the biggest
concern or one of the big concerns right
at the start of the epidemic in in the
country was about critical care bed
capacity and in fact only nineteen
percent of our critical beds care beds
are occupied now with Kovac nineteen
patients and that pattern is replicated
across all critical care usage in the UK
next time belief here we can see people
in hospital and the geographical
distribution and I think in the bottom
right hand side where London has had a
severe and sharper rise in the number of
cases in a highly densely populated area
that has come down though other parts of
the country are seeing a slightly
different shape to their epidemic
you
for hours either across all our settings
not just the
little settings but again you can see
that the the rolling average which is a
better measure as the deaths are
reported at different times shows that
those deaths are steadily decreasing
which is obviously welcome news and we
need to keep our social distancing going
thank you very much indeed questions
firstly from the public
we have Suzanna from Oxford the
government's Covent alert level one is
eradication in the UK is this a
realistic policy target well that is a
great question and Jenny as the the
scientists and epidemiologists your the
your best place to answer timing and so
it's an ambitious targets I think but
then I think if we're dealing with
something as serious as covered we want
to be ambitious you may be referring to
the w-h-o announcement over the last few
days where I think the the reality of a
covert in global terms not just in the
UK was was put forward and I think it's
fair to say there isn't an immediate
easy out to come to this to get us to
level one smallpox is the only
infectious disease where we have
actually eradicated a disease but of
course there is an example there so I
think having that ambition is good the
key things obviously that we need to
drive this forward in the long term are
understanding the immunity so not just
understanding our antibody response but
what that means in terms of maintaining
immunity in a population over time and
obviously treatments in the short term
for treating people but to eradicate it
we really need vaccine as well so all of
those programs are ongoing but clearly
the immediate effort is to reduce the
number of cases that we have and to
ensure that we dampened down the
epidemic in the UK and that's what we're
doing at the moment thank you very much
indeed next question which is has been
sent in by ana from Worthing Anna from
Worthing asks after many years of
waiting for a payroll
nurses are frustrated and feel very
devalued due to a never-ending
unrecognized financial pay they deserve
would this crisis be a strong evidence
for the government to finally recognize
that Nursing is a highly skilled
profession and it deserves decent pay
but I think I'm best placed to answer
this on Anna and I agree very strongly
that Nursing is a highly skilled
profession and deserves decent pay and
we put up nurses pay last month and in
fact last year we had the fastest rise
the biggest rise in the pay especially
for the beginner for nurses when they're
starting their career and the lowest
paid nurses who've got to pay rise very
significant of over 15% so there has
been a significant pay rise for nurses
and I think one of the things that one
of the things the crisis has shown is
just how much the nation values our our
staff across the health and care system
including nurses and when it comes to
how we reward people for their efforts
in this crisis what I can tell you is
that as the health secretary I will be
making sure that we fight to have that
that fair reward but it's I think it is
it's worth noting the changes that the
increases that have been put through in
the in the last couple of years and and
and it is worth all of us coming
together to show the value with which we
hold nurses and everybody else who works
across health and social care thank you
for your question Anna next question is
from Allison Holt of the BBC Secretary
of State today's official figures show
the very high number of deaths in care
homes and also in hospitals of care home
residents the registry from introduced
today aren't they too little too late
well what I set out today are the things
that we've been doing throughout this
crisis to support people in care
homes and in the in the last couple of
weeks we have as you say added further
measures I've set them all out today
they have in fact been put in place over
the over the period of the crisis and
making sure that we give that support
that's needed the extra money building
on the money that we put in right at the
start the infection control processes
building on the infection control
processes that we put in right at the
start and have built throughout it's all
part of and doing everything we can to
support people in care homes and the you
know the good news is that the number of
cases the number of new cases is coming
right down but there is clearly a long
way to go and I'm also going to ask a
nikkie to comment on this strengthening
of the link between the NHS and in
particular GPS and care homes to make
sure that we get that support that
clinical support in every care and look
it's a GP I know that it's really
important all for care to all of our
residents whether you're in a care home
or you live at home you live in a big
house small house whatever it is that's
what your GP practice is there to do and
around the country the vast majority of
practices look after their care homes in
a way that you'd want your family member
to be looked after as a GP if I talked a
little bit about what happens in
practice so often GP practices or
working with other GP practices together
come together to build and what's called
a multidisciplinary team so members from
the practice members from pharmacy or
allied health professionals social care
colleagues community services colleagues
come together to offer support in to
care homes and it's really important
that we recognize it it's a
multidisciplinary team that actually is
is needed to make sure that our care
home resident stays sayst stay safe
importantly though we've really ramped
up that support over the last few weeks
and months to make sure caring residents
get the care that they need
making sure that care home managers are
able to have a regular check-in whether
that is with the GP or the lead
profession
in the team and that might be an
advanced nurse practitioner it might be
a geriatrician it has to be the right
person for the job and we've got some
incredible examples in Dorset and firmly
where this is happening really really
well and we're doing a range of other
measures to make sure that caring
residents are well supported so that is
working with our clinical commissioning
groups to make sure that medications
provision is really optimized into care
homes and we have a suite of digital
innovations there to back our care homes
as well so you've mentioned a few of
them Secretary of State but making sure
that care homes have NHS internet access
good internet access the digital tablets
are absolutely revolutionary because it
means that we can keep our residents and
staff safe while we look after our care
home residents through remote monitoring
and and we can use those portals for
residents to connect with their family
and their loved ones as well I think
it's really worth mentioning as well
that we've asked every part of the
country to offer infection prevention
control training to care homes so that's
you know how to use PPE how to Don and
doff safely how to manage social
distancing in what can be quite busy
areas and we've got a hundred percent
coverage around the country of these
super trainers who are going out to look
after our care homes so you know it will
take the whole system to look after our
home residents but absolutely something
the NHS is committed to doing thanks
very much Sam Coates from Sky I just do
a follow up please sure yes yeah if I
may if the our number has increased are
you rethinking the easing of the
lockdown
well we're constantly keeping the are
under review and it is one of our five
tests is for our to be below one the
latest evidence that dr. Harris has
presented is that the R is between 0.7
and one so we don't think that it's
above one we think that it is in a range
between 0.7 and one so that still meets
that test but of course we're constantly
looking at updating all of the
information that we see
some coats from sky secretary state
thank you given our lives are determined
by the r8y do you collectively appear
quite relaxed that the r8 is up today
and the latest r8 suggests that
transmission of the disease might not be
reducing in the rider community because
your range includes one flat is it
because despite its presentation by the
Prime Minister is actually not the best
measure to use for making decisions to
the whole country because it's skewed by
hospitals and care homes in the tragic
situations where we can reconsider
England's lifting lockdown timetable and
does it help that the data is 2 or 3
weeks out of date well there's a really
really good question Sam and if I'll
answer a couple and then hand over to to
dr. Harris the the first thing I'd say
is on the timing this is based on data
from a couple of weeks ago because of
the way that it's measured but also from
the survey data that the ons have
published and as that survey grows the
measure of R will become more timely but
even in countries that have had
large-scale survey testing for some time
like Germany there is still something of
a lag and it is an incredibly important
figure for policymakers but it's one
data point to look at alongside also the
level of in of new cases as well as the
R which is the rate at which they're
changing but I think you know a change
in the range of are that still
encompasses most of the values that we
think are could be is is it's very
important to look at but overall we this
report from the scientists says that
they are is not is not likely to be
above one and so reinforcing those
comments really I mean R is a very
standard way of looking and comparing
what's happening and it's a really
important measure but the the real
outcome that we're looking for is a
reduction in number of cases and getting
rid
the of the epidemic in the UK so that is
our focus not our our is a
representation of what is happening in
that fight so it is very important but I
think picking up some of the statistics
around this they are that you see
presented has confidence intervals
around it how how confident we are in it
as the secretary of state has said as we
go forward the ons survey will give us
key points of infection across the
country which will become increasingly
important the more points we have the
the narrower our confidence concerns are
and the clearer we are that we know
exactly how many cases there are in the
UK so it's not just the r-value it's the
triangulation of all of the evidence
that we have and I think the final point
about the r-value is when it's created
it's really important that different
models and different estimates are put
together and so you will find published
on the web now very slightly different
variations and that's really important
because it challenges if if there are
different outputs from different models
it's an opportunity for us to look and
say why is it different either across
the country in a locality or because the
the makeup of the model the data strings
which are going in are slightly
different so it's it's an important
measure but it definitely isn't the only
one thank you very much some
acknowledgement but it does look that it
does that it does look strange that on
the day that the r8 is published and is
going up you're about to heading to a
weekend where in England at least lots
of people are going to go out on long
journeys and enjoy the countryside are
you absolutely confident that that's the
right decision well we set out the five
tests in advance and one of the tests is
that our is isn't above one and in fact
you know so the data that has been
published actually confirms that test
rather than the opposite but everybody
can play their part in keeping our below
one and pushing our down and they and
you can do that by following the social
distancing rules so if you do go
and outdoors do it only with members of
your household and keep two metres away
from others who aren't in your household
and those social distancing rules are
incredibly clear and they will help to
keep us safe
I should toll from channel 4 Thank You
Secretary of State and there have been
concerns raised to us about care homes
that can't apply for these tests on the
portal they say that it only applies for
people with dementia and over 65s but
that leaves out a very vulnerable group
of people under 65 with multiple health
conditions and problems and also those
with learning disabilities why have
these people been left out well those
who are in care homes for the
working-age people not for their as
opposed to the elderly care homes of
course also need support and often also
are clinically vulnerable it is true
that age is the is this is the biggest
factor in terms of your risk towards
coronavirus but absolutely we need to
make sure that care homes for people of
working age also have access to tests
and we're rolling that out too I can see
you're trying to offer another question
I was just going to add to that because
I think as the secretary of state has
said a prioritization that start with
clearly we need to manage risk that's
how we approach all clinical risk and
different elements of risks were there
so care homes and particularly a very
very stark variation in risk for the
elderly particularly 70 80 90 so it's
really quite stark in comparison to all
other variables but in relation I'm
actually had an email yesterday from
somebody with a unit in Nottinghamshire
we're trying to implement some very
careful really good work with his
residents and staff and I've actually
put them in touch with the Director of
Public Health
now I wouldn't suggest everybody does
that immediately but the point I wanted
to raise is if there are concerns about
particular practices or prioritization
that's needed there are local oversight
of that and directors of Public Health
are working with the local NHS and local
authority directs of an adult social
care to make sure that where there are
priorities of that particularly if there
is an outbreak or something like that in
a in a non elderly care home that they
can access tests you had to follow up I
did have a follow up and I just wondered
a lot of people that I spoken to say
that they feel like they've been
forgotten and I wonder do you think that
you're putting the people with learning
disabilities at the back of the queue no
I I I don't think that's the case
because we've been throughout this
insuring that the guidance that goes out
is to all care homes of course and you
know one of the things that I've been
very worried about as Secretary of State
throughout my time in this job is to
ensure that we get support to people in
in in care homes for those of
working-age as well as elderly care
homes it is so important that we do that
and we have done that through this
crisis too but we've got to make sure
also that we follow the clinical advice
in terms of the different risks that
people face and so if there is an
individual care home that thinks they're
not getting what is clinically needed
then of course they should get in
contact and they should starting with
the local director of public health but
ultimately they should raise that and
but we've got to follow the follow the
clinical advice in all in in terms of
how we we apply the testing capability
that we have there's some very good
resources in terms of specific advice
and guidance written for learning
disabled as well so I think it's not
just about carers and parents and
guardians or care managers it's very
much for individuals themselves yeah
thank you I sure Michael Smith from The
Daily Mirror
good afternoon I've got two quick
questions
firstly to the scientists with the
government hoping to start reopening
schools in the next couple of weeks
you've no doubt carried out some quite
complex modeling of the risks of taking
that action could you give me an idea of
what the government considers to be an
acceptable level of risk to teachers and
parents in terms of increased infections
and potentially deaths and also to the
secretary secretary of state for years
schools have been telling the Daily
Mirror that they struggle to afford
basic equipment like pens and pencils
for children's use in the classroom
social distancing is going to be hard
work in schools it's hard to get kids to
wash their hand to the best of times and
before the lockdown teachers were
telling us they didn't have enough soap
and hand sanitizer to go around if a
teacher looks at all this looks at their
own school and decides the risk to their
staff and to their community is too
great to reopen their school what
consequences would they face well on the
I'll take on the second point and then
I've asked Nikki and Jenny to comment on
the first question and we think it's
really important that this is a team
effort it is an incredible challenge
that we face with the reopening of
schools I think everybody understands
that trying to get schools open in a way
that is safe and only in a way that is
safe that is really important for
children's education but we've got to do
it in a way that that keeps the control
of the virus now the good news is in the
same way that it's terrible news that
this virus impacts on the elderly so
much and the good news is that it seems
to spare children in almost every case
not quite every case but almost every
case and so the risk to children is much
much lower than to anybody else in in
society to any other age group
if your if unless certainly if you don't
have underlying health conditions and
that means that we we are able to
propose going down this that this route
of reopening schools and you know I
wouldn't support a proposal to start to
reopen schools unless it was safe to do
so and it is safe to do so and as you
say Mikey there's an awful lot of work
to do in each individual school to make
sure that that is done in a way that's
safe thank you so to school age children
and can I just thank the teaching staff
actually for responding so quickly in
such an unusual situation and it's not
something that they would have ever had
to deal with before and they've been
really quite phenomenal but risk is
relative isn't it we have to think about
the wider risks to children and families
as well so as you said you know we
wouldn't send children back if it wasn't
safe to do so but we're doing that in a
careful phased way and monitoring the
whole time to make sure their children
and families are well but but actually
some of our children who are more
vulnerable who need more support need to
be back in school to get the benefit of
both the social environments but also
the physical space as well so it's
really important that we carefully get
our children back to school because
actually that is what's going to be good
for them in the long run so I think just
sort of trying to put the risk in
perspective if currently we have say two
or three in a thousand of our population
with infection in the proposed time
frame coming forward in the next couple
of weeks that's likely to have so I
think just just there's a lot of anxiety
I think around this but people need to
think through in an average I don't know
infant school with a hundred children
the likelihood of anybody having this
disease is very small and diminishing
with time so I think we just need to
keep that in perspective the other thing
is picking up Nikki's point on a public
health perspective there are all sorts
of risks and children who have been
invited back to school are at key points
of their education and their longer-term
health risks of not getting good
basically
occasion which then takes them into work
in employment in adult life and prevents
gives them the prevention opportunity
from long term conditions is really very
important but I think the concerns that
you're particularly referring to are
around teachers and children in in in
closed environments if you like and
there is very good advice has come out
from public health England lots of input
from pediatricians as well in a
hierarchy of controls to manage that
risk it's not simply but about a bit of
kid it's actually about how you manage
groups so in many ways managing them
more as if you were a family where you
wouldn't think about putting on PPE or
handling in different ways but you keep
in those groups you can distance within
a school and in fact school environments
for the reasons which Nicky has said
which of teachers are brilliant I know
as a parent they're often much more
productive than I was at trying to get
my children to wash their hands
consistently and practice good hygiene
so there's some really strong guidance
out there to try and support this and
the the background risk of disease is
diminishing all the time thank you Andy
McCaskill from Reuters could this is a
question from Secretary of State and the
prime minister said in Parliament this
week that the government ordered a
lockdown of care homes before the
National lockdown and watch the 23rd and
but the guidance to care homes before
then was issued on March the 13th which
suggested a restriction only on people
infected with Oviatt and those feeling
sick and your own department told us
that the only directive on a ban on care
homes came on April the 2nd that's 10
days after the National lockdown so
based on the words of your own
department do you think the Prime
Minister should correct what he said in
Parliament no on the 13th of March and
we did introduce this extra guidance and
on the basis of that guidance many of
the care home providers for instance
Care UK at that point stopped visitors
now the challenge with much of the
management
of care homes from a national level is
that their accountabilities are local
and they are it is a first and foremost
of responsibility of local government so
we brought in and we did bring in that
guidance on the on the 13th as a result
of that many care homes did stop
visitors as I said in my opening remarks
we we strengthened that guidance all
along and you know the point that I
think you know I try to articulate in my
opening comments is that we've we tried
to build infection control and the
support and the protective ring around
care homes right from the start and
Allyson Morris from the Irish News just
on another point of transparency a lot
of relatives have told us and you know
the a lot of care homes are resisting
telling them the number of infections or
even the number of deaths from
coronavirus and care homes I'm just
wondering whether that information
should be made public yes I I didn't
know about that and it's certainly
something that I'd I'd like to look into
and because I are our overall approach
in this is that transparency is the best
way forward you know we've asked the the
CQC and now the ons to come in and and
do more to be transparent about the the
impact of coronavirus you know unlike
many countries we put a deaths of people
whether they died in a care home or in
the wider community or in hospital into
our overall figures we've taken an
approach of maximum transparency and so
I can understand why people have been in
contact with you about that and it's
certainly something that we will that
will take away Jenny it's just going to
add I think we just need to think really
carefully about what a care home is
because as we've heard earlier in this
it might be learning disabled care home
in it they're not all big care homes
some of them are really quite small and
we need to be careful about individual
clinical information and families as
well and I was just going to support
this so there
is known as survey which you may well
have seen out today there are reports
coming through from CQC so there is a
lot of work trying to make the deaths
information much more understandable I
think because we it's clearly quite
difficult to with individuals who have
multiple diseases for example when a des
is registered it's not always easy to
pinpoint as a as a doctor actually what
the overriding cause of death is I think
it's quite likely that more there are
more deaths associated with kovat 19 in
older people because we know that the
risk the age is a very very significant
risk but they will have many other
illnesses as well so it doesn't
necessarily mean that's what they have
died from it's quite right that there is
interest in this and there is additional
work currently ongoing to look to see
how older people and individuals from
care homes have been using hospital
services for example along with how the
rest of the population have some of
those that usage has dropped and it's
important we understand that that was
appropriate in those individuals
thanks Andy was that as that I didn't
realize you wanted to come in again I
hope ok thanks very much indeed so
finally we'll go to Allison Morris from
the Irish News Allison I suggest it as
you will be aware of businesses impacted
by the lockdown measures are expecting a
very slow recovery this week members of
the devolved executive were briefed by
government the brexit border posts will
be required within Northern Ireland for
goods destined for the EU market after
the prime minister previously insisted
that no such checks would be necessary
what do government intend to put in
place to mitigate this double pressure
on businesses in Northern Ireland who
have both the corporate lockdown
measures and pending backtracks of order
checks to contend with and can I also
ask the deputy chief medical officer
given that the devolved regions are now
leaving weltering at a different pace
and with varying arias will she be a
facing corbin risk assessments
temperature checks and a base to self
isolate etc at ports and airports for
those travelling either in or out of
Northern Ireland who
other parts of the UK well thank you
very much indeed on the on the first
subject I know that the Prime Minister
spoke to the tea shock this afternoon a
very positive discussion and we fully
intend to meet all the commitments that
we've made in terms of delivering on the
results of the referendum Jenny do you
want to well clearly it will be for
Secretary of State and and political
colleagues to decide on the policy at
borders but I think from a scientific
perspective as a scientist as UK CMO
teams we work very closely in
understanding the science and there may
well be times whether it be within the
year within England
or across the UK countries where
potentially differential policies will
apply as we look in more detail and get
more granular insight as we damp and
down the epidemic right across the UK so
I think that is all entirely appropriate
I don't think actually although you're
hearing slight differences in timing or
announcements actually the science
that's underlying it I'm sure the public
can see coming through just the same so
things like the risk of being outside is
is minimal in managing that change in
potential changing in our value for
example and I think nearly all the UK
countries are recognizing that there are
slightly different
epidemic curves as we showed in the
slides earlier so I think those
conversations will keep going the
science and depending it is the same and
we do need to respond to our different
populations taking account of all of the
things like density of population and
travel patterns as well on temperature
I've spoken about this before the
evidence around temperature checks
whether it be on borders or whether it
be going into work and particularly for
covert is not a very valid intervention
in terms of scientific prevention if you
have an incubation period up to 14 days
the chances of you finding somebody with
that temperature on the minute that they
walk through a border or the doorway to
work is very small and in fact we know
that quite a large proportion of people
who have symptoms for Kovich actually do
not have a
temperature at least in the early
symptomatic phase so much more
importance I think that we focus on
people taking themselves out of their
work and social environments as soon as
they feel they have any symptoms at all
fantastic thank you very much indeed and
that ends today's coronavirus daily
briefing
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News